With that we learned a lot about events, how to listen to them, how to work with the event object, what
we can get out of the event object and also about this event delegation pattern.
Now sometimes, you don't want to listen to an event or at least not just listen to an event,
you also might want to trigger an event programmatically.
I'll show you an example for when you could do that a little bit later in this module, in our project
application,
let's for now just see how it would work.
Let's say when I click any list item for whatever reason, I also want to trigger a click event on my
button.
So first of all here, I'll again listen to a click event so that I can see that it worked but now back
to the list item from inside this event listener, I want to trigger this event listener.
Now of course, we could store this function in a named function and then just call this function from
inside here
but let's say for whatever reason, that's not really an option,
we really want to click that,
a better example might be with our form by the way. There we could say we want to submit the form, not
just with the submit button in there but also when something else happens on the page,
that's probably a better example because it's a bit more realistic.
So let's say when we click any list item for whatever reason, we want to submit this form. Now
to do that, we need access to that form element,
so we need access to the element for which we want to trigger an event
and then here in this case on a list item or when the list is clicked or any item in the list, I want
to call form and now you can call click there for example to simulate a mouse click on it or also submit,
as a method just like that
and this does not just exist for the form but basically for any DOM element,
a lot of the events you can listen to can also be triggered programmatically, especially something like
clicks or form submissions.
So now with that if you save this and you reload, you will see that if I click any list item here, the
page reloaded because the form was submitted.
Now you might be wondering why our event listener here for the form submission is not doing its work
and preventing the default.
Now if you trigger a submit event programmatically, then indeed the submit event listener is skipped,
typically event listeners execute. If I for example instead of submitting the form simulate a click on
my button
and please note that I do have a click listener on the button, you will see that if I do that and I reload,
this click listener does execute, though with a dummy mouse event where all coordinates are zero by the
way. For form submission, the event listener is not triggered.
So triggering such an event programmatically is not exactly the same as when a user clicks on it,
it can bypass certain listeners like a form submission listener. Still from time to time it can be useful
and it is good to be aware of it.
Now if you still wanted to work around that by the way, you could of course select the submit button
here in the form and instead of calling submit on the entire form, you call click on the submit button,
then it will basically do the same as if a user click the submit button which will trigger the submit
the event listener and allow you to prevent the default,
so that would be possible.
So even if you need to submit the form, you can still trigger that programmatically by simulating or
by triggering a click on the button instead of the form submission itself.